<!--
.. title: From a recovering former Python community member 
.. slug: psf-woe
.. date: 2024-09-16 18:00:00 UTC+01:00
.. tags: 
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
.. author: Nicholas H.Tollervey
-->

I really don't want to write this blog post. So, it's offered in a spirit of
polite resignation.

A couple of days ago a friend and current board member of the
[Python Software Foundation](https://www.python.org/psf-landing/) (PSF) reached
out asking, "Hey, we want to feature some CSA awardee's pictures in the PSF
blog post, do you want to give me a picture of you to use?" CSA is the PSF's
[Community Service Award](https://www.python.org/community/awards/psf-awards/),
of which I was a recipient millions of years ago.

The short answer is, respectfully, "no, and please don't feature me".

The longer answer, which I'm sharing here so I don't have to keep repeating
myself, is more complicated.

It is a privilege that many remarkable folks in the Python community are my
friends. They are a diverse and international bunch who bring to life a
multitude of experiences, cultures and outlooks. To say they are very different
(despite sharing common cause in Python) is an understatement. Their unique and
multifarious gifts are something special to cherish and, just like a
symphony orchestra, when taken together their whole is vastly greater than the
sum of their parts. My world is enlarged by my fulfilling encounters with these
folks and I am thankful that I am able to learn, grow and flourish through our
interactions together.

Yet, there is a dark side to the Python community. 

As I have extensively explored elsewhere in this blog
([here](/article/compassion/), [here](/article/on-being-together/) and
[here](/article/victorian-python-allegory/)), I no longer participate in the UK
Python community. I do not feel safe or welcome, nor do I trust the UKPA's
presence in that community. Through conversations with many of my Python
friends, I can say with certainty that _my experience in the Python community
is **NOT** unique_.

A case in point...

In a triggering turn of events, over the past two months I have watched with
increasing horror as important parts of the Python community have unravelled
into what can only be described as a cesspit of hurt and dysfunction.
Factionalism is rife, heels have been dug in and the positions of others have
been misrepresented.

It saddens me deeply that the PSF are at the centre of (although not the only
participants in) this unfortunate and destructive turn of events.

Stepping up and volunteering in an open source community is hard
work. Often things go wrong and complicated situations arise so nuance, self
reflection and compassion are key to affirmative growth and collaboration.

Herein is the nub of our sorry situation.

The PSF appears
[unable to acknowledge](https://pyfound.blogspot.com/2024/07/pythons-supportive-and-welcoming.html)
both the plurality of dispositions in our community nor that the Python
community is often a deeply unpleasant place. I believe the first step to
effectively engage with such unpleasantness is to acknowledge that it exists
and then, in a deeply uncomfortable and tricky process, explore it together via
mutual respect, compassion and honesty. Eventually, perhaps, reconciliation
and trust can flourish. Rather than corporate platitudes, shallow musings and
tragic exclusions, I hope the PSF take a long hard look at themselves and
honestly re-evaluate their presence and _the behaviour they embody within the
community_. The alternative is the disintegration of Python into something akin
to the
["People's front of Judea" segment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a0BpfwazhUA)
of Monty Python's "Life of Brian".

I sincerely hope the PSF find ways to listen, show leadership and engage with
compassion. Only then can hurt be healed, collaboration re-established and
trust regained. I'm not so much trying to call out the PSF as to call them in ~
into a more enlarged and empathetic approach than has hitherto been apparent to
me.

If you doubt my words are true, read those problematic discussions and ask
yourself... does the Python community feel healthy and happy at this moment in
time?

This is difficult work. **We can only do this work _TOGETHER_**. We can only
work together if problems are acknowledged, differences respected and mutual
trust encouraged. Currently, alas, I see no such hoped-for engagement from the
PSF. For no amount of PR gobble-de-gook, high handed pronouncements or a witch
hunt will fix such a deeply broken situation.

Until things change to a more compassionate and less performative approach, I'd
rather not be involved (thank you very much).

Peace.

<hr class="section_break"/>

<p><strong id="psf-addendum">Addendum (2024-09-18)</strong></p>

I want to publicly acknowledge and thank my PSF board member friend. They
graciously responded, "I am sorry you feel so bad about the situation. I
understand your decision, no hard feelings." This embodies the best of the
Python community. Bravo.

I want to add that I don't feel bad.

_I feel disappointed_.

The unravelling in the Python community has caused me to pause and wonder how
the actions taken by the PSF represent the sort of community we want to be. My
hope has always been for a tolerant appreciation of the subtleties of context,
a focus on open minded mutual care and understanding, along with a large dollop
of big hearted compassion and a sense of fun.

Alas, recent PSF activity is hard to reconcile with such a hope.

There appears to be confusion between things that should be celebrated (like
passion, humour, honesty, differences of culture and diversity of experience)
and things that are genuinely problematic (like deliberate bad-faith activity
or intentionally diminishing, dehumanizing, harming or harassing others).

The PSF tragically excluded folks acting in good faith. The PSF doubled down on
the "welcoming community" narrative at the exclusion of acknowledging things
are awry (and that the PSF has some part in this unfortunate situation).
Frustratingly to my eyes, the PSF's corporate "PR" diminishes the carefully
cultivated good standing and authenticity of the organisation. As a result,
Python is no longer much fun.

Open source is hard work. Everyone involved wants Python to flourish. I have no
doubt we all mean well. My disappointment is that the PSF promote ideals in a
way that appears to embody their polar opposite. Furthermore, their actions
appear to suggest the PSF no longer stands for the community... the PSF stands
for the PSF.

I hope my words stimulate a more reflective, humble and heartfelt outlook;
otherwise I fear we'll continue to decline into yet more fractious schisms.

Reconciliation is something we can only do together, and it won't be easy. 

Peace.
