<!--
.. title: Why Computers Work (part 1) 
.. slug: why-computers-1_2
.. date: 2020-08-06 19:00:00 UTC+01:00
.. tags: 
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
.. author: Nicholas H.Tollervey
-->

In a relatively short period of time computers have become ubiquitous. They
touch all aspects of our lives. As a result, computers are interesting and many
people want to know **how** they work ([this is a typical response](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tpIctyqH29Q)).

I'm going to take a different approach: I'm going to concisely explore **why**
computers work.

What's the difference?

Answers to "how?" questions tell us what method or steps make something happen.
In contrast, the answers to "why?" questions describe what makes
something possible ~ an opportunity to encounter a more fundamental
perspective. It's the difference between a car mechanic who may understand
*how* an engine works (so they can fix broken engines), and a mechanical
engineer who understands the physics and chemistry relating to *why* engines
work (so they can improve the design of engines). Knowing how something works
means your frame of reference is *within the system*, whereas if you understand
why something works you're not bound by existing products, solutions or
cultural practices.

Most importantly, cultivating an understanding of why something is possible is
an invitation for playful creativity, fearless exploration and careful
refinement of alternatives to the current crop of answers to "how?". It is an
opportunity to enlarge and change our world; a form of intellectual
empowerment and autonomy.

We'll start our journey by learning all about...

## Following Rules

Do you know how to play Snap?

(Bear with me.)

It's the sort of game very young children learn to play. It uses a standard
deck of cards and the aim is to win all the cards by taking turns to play.

Players sit in a circle with one of them acting as dealer. The dealer shuffles
the cards so they're in a random order. The cards are dealt, face down, in
equal quantity to the players until the dealer has none left. Before the game
begins, each player should have a neat stack of the same number of face-down
cards.

The player to the left of the dealer takes the first turn.

Players take a turn by moving the top card from their face-down stack onto the
top of an adjacent stack of face-up cards, so the newly moved card is also
facing up. If the face-up stack doesn't already exist, a new stack is created
by the first face-up card. The player to the left always goes next.

![Snap!](/images/snap.jpg)

If, at any time, any of the players notice face-up cards on the top of
different stacks have the same value (for example, two aces are visible), then
they shout "SNAP!". The first player who correctly shouts "SNAP!" wins all the
cards in the matching stacks of cards. The matching stacks are added to the
bottom of the winner's face-down pile. Play continues to the left of the player
who turned up the matching card.

If a player mistakenly or incorrectly shouts "SNAP!" (there are not two
matching face-up card values visible at that point in the game), then they must
pay a forfeit by giving one card from their face-down stack to each of the
other players. These are added to the bottom of the other players' face-down
stacks.

If two or more players shout "SNAP!" at the same time, both of the matching
stacks are placed in the middle and added to the "Snap pool". When "SNAP!" is
next called correctly, the winning player wins both the matching stacks and any
cards in the "Snap pool".

If a player runs out of face-down cards they flip over their face-up stack and
play continues as before. If a player completely runs out of cards, they are
out of the game.

Play continues until a player holds all the cards. The player with all the
cards is the winner and the game is over.

These deliberately precise rules describe how, given certain states of affairs,
such and such things must happen. States of affairs unambiguously describe how
things are in the world. For example, "there are two stacks of face-up cards
whose top cards are of matching value". When I say that such and such must
happen, I mean clear and unambiguous instructions describe *how* play proceeds
given a certain state of affairs.

*Why* do such rules work? Because, in addition to knowing the rules, playing
the game of Snap means modifying one's behaviour to follow these rules. If
everyone modifies their behaviour in accordance with the rules then folks can
play together. Obviously, we don't explain card games in such a formal manner
to very young children. It's good fun to informally learn how to play such
games. Children discover it's entertaining to learn and skillfully follow rules
that bring about exciting situations.

Knowing how to play Snap is analogous to knowing how computers work. Looking
beyond the rules of Snap to appreciate that human behaviour and enjoyment
motivates people to follow the rules of the game, shows us why Snap is
played. This insight may also inspire us to invent new games. Perhaps we become
inspired to explore further aspects of human behaviour relating to following
rules. Or we may even reflect upon the nature of play or games. In any case,
knowing *why* rather than *how* provides a fascinating perspective from outside
the system (of Snap, in this case).

We need to achieve an analogous enlargement of perspective beyond how computers
work in order to understand why computers work. Only by acquiring a perspective
outside current norms can we possibly hope to invent or refine technology and
explore the nature and use of such devices. The alternative is churn and
recycling of ideas and effort within the current system with little or no
actual change.

The computing related rules and states of affairs I'm going to describe are not
much more complicated than the game of Snap explained above. However, what
follows may include a few "brain twists" -- where I expect you to use your
imagination to see things in a seemingly unusual or unintuitive way! I'm
challenging you to acquire a new perspective about seemingly everyday things.
The external world remains as it was before, but you will have changed -- your
newly acquired perspective provides a deeper understanding of what you're
observing and why this makes computing possible. It's fun and can result in
rather pleasant "aha" moments (if you were a cartoon character, it's that
feeling you get when a lightbulb appears above your head).

What follows is the story of why it's possible to turn our thoughts and
intentions into programs. Programs describe what computers must do to
autonomously act in accordance with such instructions.

The first step in our story is a beautiful brain twist: to think about
thinking...
